% Managing the Haskell Dependency Hell with Nix
% Peter Simons
% 2013-04-02

# Abstract

The Nix package manager has proven very well suited for managing sophisticated
Haskell development environments. It has out-of-the-box support for installing
Haskell Platforms 2009.2.0.2, 2010.1.0.0, 2010.2.0.0, 2011.2.0.0, 2011.2.0.1,
2011.4.0.0, 2012.2.0.0, and 2012.4.0.0 on any machine running Linux or Darwin.
Furthermore, Nix provides easy access to well over 700 popular Haskell packages
from Hackage. Developers can use Nix to automate building and testing of their
Haskell packages, either by running those builds locally on-demand, or by
relying on the Continuous Integration service Hydra. Last but not least,
Haskell programmers will probably enjoy the fact that Nix packages are written
in a language that is, essentially, lazily evaluated lambda calculus.

This presentation introduces the principles of the Nix package manager, and
provides a hands-on tour through its essential features, teaching Haskell
developers how to

 - manage their working environment with Nix,
 - extend the Nix packages database with their own packages, and
 - utilize the advanced continuous integration features.

# Introduction

Purely functional programming languages like Haskell encourage software
engineers to write re-usable code. As of today, the Haskell community's central
repository "Hackage" registers 5015 packages, 3944 of which provide function
libraries. This means that approximately 78% of all Haskell packages are
intended to be re-used by other developers. For Haskell programmers, this is a
good situation to be in! There is a lot of re-usable code out there, and the
pool to choose from is growing steadily.

However, the fact that Haskell packages re-use each other a lot comes at a
price: a phenomenon lovingly referred to as "dependency hell". The task of
installing a Haskell package includes the installation of all its dependencies
(and their respective dependencies). Updating a Haskell package typically
requires updates of that package's dependencies as well. And if a package is
de-installed, then chances are that some of its dependencies become unused in
the process and ought to be de-installed, too.

Many Haskell programmers turn to Cabal for help --- only to find that Cabal
doesn't really address those tasks. Cabal can install a package, alright, but
it cannot perform reliable updates or clean up the system after a
de-installation. Arguably, Cabal doesn't even address the installation part
satisfactorily, because it is unaware of all software outside of the domain of
Haskell. The package "hsdns", for example, needs the GNU ADNS library installed
to compile, but Cabal doesn't know anything about GNU ADNS. It cannot install
that library as part of the hsdns build. All it can do is abort with an error
message, saying "the adns library is missing", but it's the users problem to
remedy that situation somehow.

Traditional package managers like `apt-get`, `rpm`, `pacman`, or `BSD ports`
are designed to solve exactly those issues. These programs are really good at
installing system packages. They know how to keep the installation up-to-date
without breaking anything, and they know how clean-up after themselves when a
package has been removed. Yet, those package managers are somewhat unprepared
for the complexity of Haskell's package system. For example, most package
managers assume that for any given package `A`, only one version of `A` can be
installed at the same time. This is certainly not true for Haskell, where
oftentimes a whole zoo of mutually incompatible library versions need to be
installed at the same time to build all installation targets. The same problem
applies to the installation of the compiler. Developers who care about portable
code need many different versions of GHC installed in parallel, so that their
code can be tested with different compiler variants, but the ability to manage
an installation of this complexity is far out of the reach of traditional
package managers.

# The Nix Package Manager

Nix [1] is a package manager very much like `apt-get` or `rpm`. At the same
time, Nix differs from traditional package managers, because it breaks with the
established Unix file system layout. Instead of installing executable programs
into `/usr/bin` and libraries into `/usr/lib`, Nix installs every package into
a directory hierarchy of its own. For example, all files that belong to the
package GHC 7.6.2 reside underneath the prefix:

    $ ls /nix/store/f2c7ia72ial5y8h5k1w7z5n87xnr5gm6-ghc-7.6.2/
    bin  lib  share

This installation scheme allows any number of GHC versions to co-exist, because
they live in completely different places:

    $ ls /nix/store/*-ghc-*/bin/ghc
    /nix/store/cczdxjhrx27wmf4rpk4rk70zabw2fggd-ghc-6.10.4/bin/ghc
    /nix/store/n6ygpkh29dfp9di27l70681k7llnhama-ghc-6.12.3/bin/ghc
    /nix/store/frziw92yvb0rgm7sx7zzsmgy7cyl16d9-ghc-7.0.4/bin/ghc
    /nix/store/82lkfs5c4l41p244apv7q5dmd91h712d-ghc-7.4.2/bin/ghc
    /nix/store/ch0cq5l0l8p7g80skifivrg4d40s8sdm-ghc-7.6.2/bin/ghc

Furthermore, packages compiled by Nix generally don't refer to any system path
outside of `/nix/store`. GHC depends on system libraries like glibc, libgmp,
and curses, but all those dependencies are satisfied entirely within Nix:

    $ ldd ghc
    /nix/store/ml128hlikbl14q4cwviafpaskskx1a3f-ncurses-5.9/lib/libncursesw.so.5
    /nix/store/zpr8jdx10napidkyz62f3nzl5fm87jyr-glibc-2.17/lib/librt.so.1
    /nix/store/zpr8jdx10napidkyz62f3nzl5fm87jyr-glibc-2.17/lib/libutil.so.1
    /nix/store/zpr8jdx10napidkyz62f3nzl5fm87jyr-glibc-2.17/lib/libdl.so.2
    /nix/store/zpr8jdx10napidkyz62f3nzl5fm87jyr-glibc-2.17/lib/libm.so.6
    /nix/store/zpr8jdx10napidkyz62f3nzl5fm87jyr-glibc-2.17/lib/libpthread.so.0
    /nix/store/zpr8jdx10napidkyz62f3nzl5fm87jyr-glibc-2.17/lib/libc.so.6
    /nix/store/989njbbf770sxyqqpyrw2m0cbfdynzbb-gmp-5.0.5/lib/libgmp.so.10

The `/nix/store` hierarchy is completely self-contained. A Haskell development
environment that's been created on one machine can be copied to any other
machine simply by running "`rsync -a /nix other-machine:/`".

A quick glance at the store paths shown above reveals yet another powerful
feature. The exact path used to store an installed package contains a
cryptographic hash that uniquely identifies

 1. the shell command sequence that built this particular package and
 2. all other store paths that this package depends on.

Suppose that GHC 7.6.2 would be compiled two times. The first build uses GCC
version 4.6.3 to build the Haskell compiler, but the second build uses GCC 4.7.
Then the results of those two builds would be stored in paths like

 - `/nix/store/ch0cq5l0l8p7g80skifivrg4d40s8sdm-ghc-7.6.2` and
 - `/nix/store/f2c7ia72ial5y8h5k1w7z5n87xnr5gm6-ghc-7.6.2`.

The cryptographic hashes assigned to those two paths differs because both
variants of GHC 7.6.2 have different dependencies (GCC 4.6.3 and 4.7
respectively). Because of this approach, Nix is able to satisfy the
requirements of the Haskell package system, which needs to keep multiple
versions of the same package around concurrently. Nix can easily do that,
simply by having a separate store path for each variant of the package.

These capabilities make Nix rather well suited for maintaining sophisticated
Haskell development environments, and the remainder of this article is intended
to provide a hands-on tutorial of how to use Nix for exactly that purpose.

# Installing the Haskell Platform

The installation procedure of Nix itself is fairly straightforward.
Ready-to-use binary packages are available for many Linux platforms
(particularly on x86, x86_64, and PowerPC), for Mac OS X, and for FreeBSD.
Furthermore, Nix can be compiled from source code on any POSIX-like operating
system. Detailed installation instructions can be found at [2].

Once Nix itself is installed, it can be used to obtain an up-to-date copy of
the Nix package database by running:

    $ nix-channel --add http://nixos.org/channels/nixpkgs-unstable
    $ nix-channel --update

Now, it is possible to see the entire set of packages known to Nix by running:

    $ nix-env -qaP '*'
    pkgs.pong3d               3dpong-0.5.0
    pkgs.rdf4store            4store-v1.1.5
    pkgs.foursuite            4suite-1.0.2
    ...                       ...

The output consists of two columns. The right hand-side shows the
human-readable name and version of the package. The left hand-side shows a
unique identifier for that particular package in the Nix package database. Both
identifiers can be used to install packages:

    $ nix-env -i 3dpong-0.5.0     # install by name
    $ nix-env -iA pkgs.pong3d     # install by attribute

Now, to install the Haskell Platform, we first need to make up our mind which
version we want, because there are plenty to choose from. The command

    $ nix-env -qaP '*' | grep haskell-platform

shows that all of the versions 2009.2.0.2, 2010.1.0.0, 2010.2.0.0, 2011.2.0.0,
2011.2.0.1, 2011.4.0.0, 2012.2.0.0, and 2012.4.0.0 are available, and each of
those versions of Haskell Platform can be compiled with GHC versions 6.10.4,
6.12.1, 6.12.2, 6.12.3, 7.0.1, 7.0.2, 7.0.3, 7.0.4, 7.2.1, 7.2.2, 7.4.1, 7.4.2,
7.6.1, and 7.6.2 respectively!

For the sake of the example, let's just choose the latest official version:

    $ nix-env -iA haskellPackages.haskellPlatform
    installing `haskell-haskell-platform-ghc7.4.2-2012.4.0.0'
    ...
    building path(s) `/nix/store/j1gq9xciqj3390himzi3p9xcln9hnxl4-user-environment'
    created 1159 symlinks in user environment

When that command is run for the first time, it will download and install a
*lot* of packages, because the Haskell Platform depends on many other things
such as the Linux kernel headers, glibc, GCC, GMP, Perl, and so on. Of course,
these packages will be re-used when installing a different version of the
Haskell Platform later, so one doesn't have to worry that every single install
is going to be that expensive.

In its last step, `nix-env` creates a "user environment" at
`$HOME/.nix-profile`, which simplifies use of the installed packages a lot. That
environment uses symlinks to create a view of the Nix store that combines those
packages that have been installed into a single hierarchy. For example, the
path `~/.nix-profile/bin/ghc` will be a symlink to
`/nix/store/vlx3ikjjxlfvqjjlx74cg07p79y43mdq-ghc-7.4.2/bin/ghc`. The path
`~/.nix-profile/bin/alex`, on the other hand, points to
`/nix/store/7rfilvshj9wzm3rx86m4mkpf76l24fhs-alex-3.0.2/bin/alex`. The binaries
`alex` and `ghc` live in different store paths, but the user environment joins
all those paths into a single hierarchy. This means that it is sufficient to
add `$HOME/.nix-profile/bin` to `$PATH` to use the Haskell Platform from Nix.

# References

[1] Nix, the purely functional package manager: <http://nixos.org/nix/>

[2] Nix Installation Instructions: <http://hydra.nixos.org/build/4480483/download/1/manual/#chap-installation>
